[Music]
hello everyone it's my great pleasure to
introduce all of you to mr rex murphy
who's my guest today
rex is a canadian commentator and author
who deals primarily with canadian
political and social matters
he began his lengthy career as the main
interviewer and commentator for
here and now the canadian broadcasting
corporation's nightly tv news program
in the province of newfoundland he was
the regular host of cbc radio 1's
cross-country checkup
for a good while the only nationwide
call-in show in canada
and one that was avidly listened to
across the country
for 21 years before stepping down in
september 2015.
he has been a columnist for two of
canada's most influential newspapers
first he wrote a weekly saturday column
in the globe and mail for most of the
first decade of the century and
is currently writing an influential
column three times weekly
for the national post all the newspaper
readers in canada
look forward to those columns mr murphy
is one of canada's
most well-known figures he writes and
speaks
with a witty intense informed acerbic
style
his capacity to lampoon satirize
and think critically makes him the bane
of unprepared politicians and
other public figures across the country
thanks very much for agreeing to talk to
me rex
well thank you very much for having me
on and before we get into
any of the chat let me say on zoom what
i said in private
it's very good to see you back and i
know i'm giving the
giving words to about twenty thousand
times twenty thousand other people when
i say that
well i appreciate that very much and
it's it is
i'm very pleased to be able to be doing
this again it's it's
it's it's been it's increasingly a treat
to do
well i'm very pleased to hear that i
spoil your treat though
you picked the wrong person for a treat
go ahead
yeah well i guess it depends on your
taste eh yeah
so i thought we might start by walking
through your professional career your
career
your life for that matter uh you you
were born on the east coast
yeah i was born on the east coast you
know by the newfoundland stand a fairly
large town it's called carboneer
uh my father worked on the american base
which was one of the five
in newfoundland at winston churchill
kind of traded to the americans remember
the
lease for ships uh he worked there from
the very beginning in 1941 we moved
closer to that place i mentioned this
for a reason
uh when i was about 10 it was a much
smaller town
but because i was adjacent to the base i
had some american influence even as a
kid in newfoundland in the 50s
and that precipitated after i finally
finished walking around universities
i actually taught american students 1-12
in the naval station school and i spent
a whole year there
back and forth drawing up curriculum and
teaching canadian studies believe it or
not to american kids
it's a it was an experience that for the
last 10 or 15 years when american
politics has become so dominant
that little visitation to the argentina
school
has proved i won't say useful but it
gives me a deeper context i think
so where did you go to university and
what did you study
i went to university two places i went
to memorial university
i stayed there for five years i studied
english literature and i was blessed if
you want to talk
to what i am pleased to call my life
i think a cardinal experience and i'm
not just saying it
is that the english department at the
time at memorial university
and the university was quite small in
3000 people and by the time you got to
your fourth year if you were in an
honors program
uh you had maybe 15 or 16 students so
you you really did get to meet and know
the faculty
and three or four of them one of them in
particular dr gm
story who wrote over 20 years
in collaboration with others the
dictionary of newfoundland english
and let you know this is not some silly
remark dr gm story was also one of the
editorial advisors
for the great oxford english dictionary
all 22 volumes of it
so here was a man of tremendous talent
and
and controlled enthusiasm but impeccable
taste
and a knowledge of english literature
that i haven't encountered since
i know i'm rambling on but it's the
nature of my mind then i went off to
oxford
i only spent a year there i signed up
for law
and actually ended up going to all the
english classes uh helen gardner was the
editor of don the friend of t.s eliot
and the helen gardner would be giving a
lecture uh it would
be like if you were a rap fan or
something and you you avoided all the
big names so i
i basically read a lot for that year uh
second year law
came back and i figured out then uh i've
been going to school i went to school
very young at the age of four
i've been going to one form of school or
other for about 20
i'm sorry about 17 or 18 years straight
and i decided to kind of just
stop for a while by the way you'll
already have noticed this
i talk too much so stop me when i when i
ramble on well good we'll have a good
competition that way because one of the
things that people constantly comment
they're well that would be good it would
be good for me to lose that particular
battle now and then
so i i have something to ask you about
that particular comment so
i talked to john me park
yes yawn me park a week ago now
you may know the name she is a she
escaped from north korea
yes and she wrote a book called in order
to live which is an amazing book
and the book ends in 2015 but
after 2015 she
enrolled in columbia university which
was a dream of hers and a dream of her
father that she'd be an educated person
and she studied humanities at columbia
and i asked her what that was like and
she said that
it was a complete waste of time and
money and that she felt that she was
completely unable to utter
an opinion that was genuine the whole
time she was there
and it shocked me you know and so i
asked her very specifically
i said come on come on you you're you're
not going to tell me that
the entire time you spent in columbia
you didn't have at least one professor
or two professors who stood out who
really taught you now she had told me
during the interview that she had
encountered george orwell's work
when she was in south korea particularly
animal farm and that was what
um partly what influenced her to start
speaking and writing
and so and she had read a lot when she
was educating herself in south korea
prior to going to south korean
university and then to colombia
so it's not like she was unfamiliar with
the potential impact of let's say the
classics on
on on on on her life on her philosophy
but when i pressed her the best she
could do was to
identify a single biology class which
dealt with evolution
which was a complete mystery to her
given her background
because history sort of started when her
dynastic totalitarians were born
um but she said even that took a wicked
turn to the politically correct
direction by the time she was done
so but your experience at university go
into that a little bit more detail
well i'm glad you you elaborated that as
you did
and i i suppose not i suppose i know i
brought up that university experience in
the hope that
and we'll do it now down the road in
this conversation
i think outside of family that is always
principle and will never be
superseded outside of family if there's
anything that
that contributed to the way that i look
at things
and have given me lasting benefit okay
you may be familiar with samuel
johnson's remark about literature it
applies to all the arts
that it exists better to help us enjoy
life
or to enjoy it uh it fixes the mind and
when you have a real
university you get these things
i might the professor i i i mentioned
for example
when he found a book it was one of our
other kessler's i won't bother to name
it
he actually walked to my house on a
saturday uh after not just a kid
and in all of them but he came to the
little uh studio of sorry the student
house and
wanted me to have this book for a week
so i could read i mean this kind of
almost genuflection to the emergent or
emerging
mind of a young person is something that
stays forever so
that long winded again the university
experience
is was the strongest because the
universities then had values
they worshipped and that's a good word
not to be backed off from
they worshipped the best creations the
best fashions the best styles of thought
the best scientific uh finesse
and they they made you not made you they
induced you
entities grateful to to be grateful for
what
other first-rate minds have contributed
to the temper of the entire human race
and now when i see you know i know this
perhaps not quite as well as you because
you are a professor
and you've gone through some of the the
grinder universities now at the
humanities level
from everything i read are a disgrace
uh the the treason of the clerks it is
it is
they are so suffocated by these arch
and empty philosophies that have no
logic
and are punitive i would now i'm a
person that was so
taken by the university that i almost
worshipped it
and now i tell people that have younger
people
younger children 20 21 22
don't go to the damn university unless
you're taking science
go to a trades college or just go out on
your own it's the saddest thing that has
happened
in the western world that we've allowed
second-rate minds political agents
propagandization as instruction we have
decimated
the soul of the university uh by the way
i i totally agree with you
uh you said somewhere and i probably
will not be quoting you correctly
burn them down and start it all over
again uh west
what not for you one little footnote if
the
first world as we're accustomed to
calling it wants to keep its precedence
i often think of students in asia in
india
in china even they are so intent on
really learning something and they'll in
an indian school that maybe plays a
hundred dollars a pupil
they're doing so much better than the
school that's the schools are
in this game too then schools getting
ten and fifteen thousand dollars per
student
the west is trivializing its main
dynamic that has always been
intellectual and it always will be i
mean so let's
zero in on that so yesterday i talked to
paul rossi
and paul rossi is the high school
teacher math teacher
yes you remember he wrote a letter a
week and a half ago
column that barry weiss published in her
sub stack
i read it right okay so we talked and he
talked about his time in university
studying with the post studying
post-modern philosophy
yes and and he said that he was very
much attracted to it at the time
but then he unpacked why and he believed
that he was resentful at that point
about
lacking a genuine creative voice
and that the postmodern philosophy that
he was taught
gave him and the professors
that were teaching him and his peers a
weapon
with which they could a weapon to
undermine what it was that they were not
capable of doing themselves
and so instead of the worship that you
described which characterized your
professors and
fortunately for me my professors as well
who taught me a tremendous amount
especially in my junior college
they they were taught a method of
dispensing with literature
yes reading it as if it was something
else and
i suppose morally superseding it in some
sense
oh no absolutely the idea that
especially when post-modernism and the
reconstruction and
all those attendant pseudo philosophies
uh you read milton to find out uh if he
was treated his daughter's
not this this miracle that we call
paradise lost or samson agonisties
you he read homer to find out you know
if he's a blood worshiper
this whole this whole game of taking the
great documents of western civilization
as a hunting ground for moral uh
woke offense well first of all it's
catastrophically stupid
if you have the 48th symphony of mozart
or the beethoven's fifth and the only
reason you're playing it is to find out
if either most of their beethoven had a
sexist attitude you're out of your mind
self-stop this and and the idea that
what are the great propulsions of a
certain segment of western society is
simple envy
and resentment of its success even as
those who are envious
and resentful are basically being fed
and
kept by it they go into these
institutions
with some sort of childish immature
animosity towards what you know
if you think of it the rise of thought
is is the greatest thing we have
and at the in the richest part of the
world the most prosperous
the highest institution have you been
reading some of these whiteness things
the new rules
and this is like the ones the federal
government are using to train your civil
servants you mean yes
the epidemic of of anti-racism
which is a kind of racism diversity
which is
monosyllabic if you don't have our ideas
you don't have any or you're a racist or
you're this or you're that i don't know
how a free people
have succumbed so easily and so
lethargically
to a kind of it's not physical
but it's a metaphysical restraint and
the cowardice about some of these but
these universities that apologize for
some professor
the the new york times guy 49 years
columnist and in an explicatory
conversation
using that n word editor said no there's
nothing wrong with him but then he fired
him
uh the universities damn them
were the place that this this other
pandemic began
and while we're living through culver we
should also understand that
the intellectual pandemic
this goes to our heart and core we are
displacing ourselves by allowing
charlatans
to wreck the intellectual standards of
the western world
so what did your education your
education in english literature what did
that do
to you and for you so you were one
person when you went in and you were a
different person when you came out so
what has been the advantage and i also
mean so i interviewed jocko willink on
my
podcast a while back and he talked about
going to take an english literature
degree after he had finished his
military training
and then he explained for 20 minutes the
unbelievable potency that being able to
communicate gave him
as a individual and but also as a
military leader
so it was very striking because he made
a practical case as well as a
metaphysical and intellectual case so
personally what did this education do
for you while you were having it and but
then also afterwards in your life
well i actually have a fairly retentive
memory uh
for the entire experience especially at
memorial university
uh the first thing i'll give it hanger
i'll give you an angle
i'm not usually a biographical by the
way but i'll do this
there was an english professor he was
from england and he was one of those
collaborators with dr george story on
this dictionary he was a dialectician
his name was john woodson i haven't said
that name in
35 40 years but he came into uh i it was
my
was only my first year yeah in the first
year we had an excerpt
from paradise lost it was one of the
great epic similes in the very first
book
he scarce and sees when the superior
feeling was walking towards the shore i
could do the whole damn thing but we
won't bother you with that
but whitison as opposed to saying now
you should read this thing it's very
complicated
it's one of those deeply ramifying
similes that only milton ever wrote
and he read it out loud and he had a
good voice
and even though the milton is is a very
difficult poet by the way
even though it was difficult the sound
of it
milton is the genius of the auric
sensations of the english verse even
better than shakespeare
and i'm telling you the truth here i am
when he
finished that i hadn't heard of it
that's how bad i was
i had we had very few books in our house
growing up i went over to the library
because the simile was so exciting i had
to read paradise laws this wasn't
prompted by anybody else
and i could repeat instances of that
kind
where the sharpness of what was being
related or the beauty of it never
underestimate aesthetics
the beauty of it the precision of it the
ability to find
words that have depth of meaning that
echo their own etymology
to marshal them in patterns of order and
the intellectual aura
that comes out of and one other little
tiny
note i'll give you was i we read john
don a lot a lot later
some of john dunn's love poems are
extremely complex they're so called
metaphysical
but they're intellectual in a real sense
they're hard to understand i remember
wrestling with one poem of john don's
for about a day
i mean only 14 15 lines wasn't the
sonnet but it was insane phone
and i finally got it i can still see the
light bulb over man in the library
in other words i come from an outport
background more or less
in a cut-off culture this is not a
criticism it's just fact
uh not as i said a lot of material
growing up in the house
and then all of a sudden it was like a
series of of
benign explosions the second thing that
university did
and i think properly so by their example
less than by their preaching the
professors that i met
they really did value language they did
value
the the the great resource of poetry
that
exists by the way over the centuries and
they also said
they also taught a certain courtesy of
mind that you could have your
disagreements
but based them on you know the material
at hand that don't float them out of the
year if you want to talk
about john milton uh you talk about his
poetry you talk
about if you want you talk about these
pros but very few do
but you don't go into the poem to find
something that
in some sort of deeply infantile manner
offends you now when you write paradise
lost i'll listen to you criticizing it
anyway once again i might but yeah
here's what i did i memorized a lot
and that's something i would recommend
to all of the people who are listening
to you when they listen to you
that a lot of education should be just
that it should be simple retention put
poetry
and prose in your head and in your heart
the power bloom used to point it out and
i agree with them
that learning by heart is more than just
a trite phrase once you put it in there
it expands your person and to answer
your question now directly
the difference was this wendy and callow
immature would that's
standard for the age but i came out with
something that was permanent and
as far as i'm concerned at least uh had
the most enduring value outside of
as i said domestic circumstance that i
have ever had
it's still here and so you've talked to
us a fair bit specifically about poetry
and you just made a case for for
memorizing it so that you can
decide it and you did recite some and
i've often found
it's surprising and and remarkable to
hear someone
i i haven't memorized a lot of poetry
and
i'm i'm struck not infrequently by
someone's capacity to recite there's
something unbelievably impressive about
it
but you're really making a case for
first poetry
and epic poetry and second um
for for for memorizing it so
first let's go to the poetry what's it
done for you you talked about aesthetic
experiences first so that was a marker
right these series of benign explosions
yeah yeah well
what's it done for me one of the great
things it's done for me
um yeah this is this is consistent i'm
being correct on this
if you read oscar wilde it is easy to
approach writers
or walter peter or samuel johnson or sir
thomas brown
uh some of the later essays of the 20th
century by giving you
charles lamb you'll never write as well
as they
and understand that if you or if you're
inclined to do this writing stuff
but my god they set the standard they
sent you something you
i can't do that nab nabakov is probably
my best in the mod he's the best modern
prose writer
never been able to write a sentence like
never but having read him
i'm ashamed i'm ashamed when i'm sloppy
or lazy
and you always aim at the high ground
and what it did it set an ideal in the
mind and words by the way are very
precious things i mean
you teach the bible in many ways and the
bible is
apart from its obvious spiritual
it is a textbook of the highest forms of
language even milton put it before
greece
but it sets a standard it gives you
a wrestling match if you read in the
back of
essay and there are some and then you
look at in my case some
scribbled column you're still trying
i tried to find the right word because
i've been prompted by
all these people i've read before and i
i i'm glad you made the
memorization here's what that does you
can get
meaning you can get the meaning of a
line or the meaning
of a verse but there's there's a
secondary
engine or energy attached to poetry and
great prose
and you bring it into your mind so that
you have you know into your living
sensibility so that in some weird
osmosis
it will lift your style or your attempts
and the second thing is if especially
sir thomas brown and hydra yotappia
if you have a model of of high prose
and it sits in your head and you i do i
know several lines of it
uh i think somehow or other it
contaminates you
this is a good word to use in the in the
play but it contaminates you
in a rich way you get something from it
this osmotic
imitation that will only take place if
you've lodged it in your
in your consciousness and one final
point if you wish to
memorize poetry and things your best
years
are 15 16 to 25 whatever you learn
then and learn by heart as i call it i
can give you
screams of hamlet they stay
it's a lot harder to memorize at 50 or
60. or
god knows 70. and i hate it even to say
the word
i'm rambling on again jordan this is bad
of me no it's exactly right
it's exactly right and it's it's
definitely not rambling and
maybe that's because you've been
infected with the poetic spirit
i mean i i have to let all our readers
our
listeners and watchers know that i mean
rex's column is very very influential
in canada and it's not least because of
the manner in which he crafts his words
and so
how much poetry do you know by heart do
you think
in my prime i i this is
not sound like a most of this most i
memorized all of john dunn because his
poems
apart from the uh immortality that's all
that those are very long but all his
songs and sonnets they love poetry
and the religious on it the divine
silence of john done by the way are
marvelous things so so so also is
is his sermons i wish people would read
them today just for the glory
of the rhetoric it's it's it's
phenomenal i mean it is phenomenal
i read a did a lot of milton memorizing
most of the sonnets
he thought i saw my latest spells insane
individual by saints
whose bones i scattered on the alpine i
can go on
i i memorized the ones that most
impressed me
and i had impact and i listened to
richard burton and john gielgud on
record
and after listening by the way that's
the easiest way if you listen five or
six times
and it lodges in your mind it will never
go out
and so the recordings in those days you
get
the seven ages of shakespeare with
gilgood reading it
with his uh infinitely nuanced
articulation no one could speak a word
better than you would
it stays with only the easier to
remember of course is music
music plays in your head if you play the
sonata or something enough on the record
uh that that'll be alive 25 years later
but to memorize poetry do it when you're
young
and what you memorize at that period
becomes permanently installed
it fades can you remember would you
recite something for us
uh i'll probably stumble now because
you're putting me on the spot but i just
i just started with the uh
the building caller i think i thought i
mean we thought i saw my latest spells
that satan brought to me like alcestus
from the grave from joel's great son to
her glad husband gave
rescued from death though pale and faint
and
the thing there is he thought i saw my
latest spouse at saint
that was milton's second wife brought to
me like alcestus from the grave and
there there's
there's a place to stop let's see we're
doing this alcestas
uh was a greek woman i forget
her husband's name but the husband was
told that he was shortly to die
and he was very very young and they were
both friends of hercules okay
and so hercules came to their house
after the wife had died but he didn't
know
that alcestas had died and he didn't
know the house was in mourning
and after nine days of feasting as only
hercules could
uh me thought i saw malay the husband
came and told him the story that he had
been told by the gods that he was going
to die young and he went to his parents
and they said he said to them you are
very old
so therefore if you take my place you
will not lose many years
but i will be saved and his parents
turned him down and his friends turned
him down
and obsessed as his wife without even
being asked
she submitted herself to mortality she
died for him
so when hercules heard the news and that
he'd been treated so well he
hercules he determined to repay the
hospitality by going into the underworld
he picked ancestors away from this
and he brought him back i forget the
husband's name for some reason
but he would not he wanted to make it a
surprise so he put a veil over the
returned
wife's face and when he came to the
husband
he gradually undid the veil and gave him
back
from the dead his living wife now go
back to the couple of sentences i gave
you he thought i saw my late espoused
saint
brought to me like alcestus from the
grave
there's a few lines down her face was
veiled yet to my fancy sight love
sweetness goodness
in her face shine as in no face with
more delay
so when milton throws out alcestes
there's only one word
there's an entire train of secondary
thought and mythology just in that one
little line this is why
you would study him so that you get in
tremendous range and depth all within
these are silence anyway that's the me
thought i saw my latest about the saint
avenger lord i slaughtered saints whose
bones i scattered on the out by
mountains
et cetera et cetera so now we can do
this all day but there's no need
well it's so interesting me to me to see
you reflect on
your education and your poetic education
given the track of your career and
well because it's pr it was also so
practical
i mean yeah yeah and you're you're
making a very
strong and personal case for the utility
of english literature now you said you
grew up in a house that didn't have a
lot of books you know we were
not making any depression stories we
were we never missed a meal
uh but we didn't have books uh once in a
while
one of those readers digest condensed
books would my father
harry would get them on the base or
something uh in the school we went to
there was a library that consisted
mainly of the lives of the saints
uh what no there weren't there was you
know if there were
five or six by the time i was 13 14 i
was buying the
novels in the drugstore the drugstores
used to have the little book racks in
those days
but it was only when i got in university
and it all came on
i devoured i did about 14 out of 20
courses in those that 20
[Music]
14 or 15 of them are english i even
added a couple of
subjects english studies in the fourth
year
i was up to seven when you did five a
year in those days
but in the university like i told you
about the paradise lost you go over you
you went to the library you could pick
up what you wanted and those days you
walked the stacks so you would often be
prompted
merely by the title of a book take it
out so now there weren't many uh but
that's not unusual in newfoundland and
but in other ways newfoundland education
would be looked upon as very
back you know backward now but we missed
certain things i was catholic
and we bought it by in a nun school
presentation sisters
and one of the benefits of the catholic
education was the catechism this is
something you had to memorize
we're back to this again the butler's
catechism you had it for seven or eight
years continuously
it started off who made you god made you
why did he make it to know and love him
here on earth and afterwards serve with
him forever in heaven
uh it got more complicated as it went
through now you were being taught
religion
but when you got old enough to see it it
it also had taught you slyly
logic because it was a question and it
was a cataclysm catechism
uh how do you know that there's a
purgatory they had a great long
i can almost do that one too a great
long answer to that they said if this is
this and that's that
then there must be this so it was
inferentially teaching you logic
and because it was using scholastic
terms these were old books
it was it was basically building your
vocabulary be paid attention to it
we often get the best benefits from
certain kinds of learning
inadvertently and and insidiously
but benignly insidiously they come at us
i never understood why the catechism
held such power but it was just that it
was essay writing too
uh you didn't do things sloppily or
loosely so what would be looked about
how they're
teaching them wrote and this is terrible
or treating like robots
you never know what's going in and the
chemistry that forms anyway
well it's really interesting to me that
you're that you're making a case for it
as an advanced form of imitation
yeah i mean when children play when they
play being a dad for example when
they're playing house
they don't mimic the father but by which
i mean
they don't precisely duplicate with
their body the actions they saw their
father take what they do is they view
the father's actions across a broad
range of situations
and they extract out the gist and then
they embody the gist
and that that play development is
incredibly important and it's based on a
very complex mimicry
and the case you're making is that by
embodying the poetry
which is to memorize it that you're also
you're also
imbibing the gist essentially yes so
there's a living spirit there that
inhabits you as a consequence of the
of the of the mimicry and i've never
heard that case made before it
makes sense to me because of course poet
poetry especially
declaimed poetry is a dramatic art and
so it is a performance
it's even more than that it's it's
incantatory
in both senses here's another little
little this is my here's a better key to
it
there's a line and again another line of
milk sweet is the breath of mourner
rising sweet
with charm of earliest birds now you
know what a charm is it's a spell
it casts you over uh he uses another
word another place
in china we speak of of poetry
when he says the word the charm of early
he's talking about song
but it's interesting that song and charm
are actually synonyms that when we speak
of
charming we're speaking of an invisible
power of allure and when we speak of a
poem as incantatory or spell
we're doing the same thing there's an
aura you you use
slightly different terms once you absorb
it
uh there's a sheen that propels some
some part of the motor of your
consciousness but only if you imitate
the best because only the best contain
this particular here's an awful ugly
word battery
okay all right so i'm gonna have to
think about that some more we'll return
to it so
you took an an excess load of courses
what did your parents think about your
choice of university education
and and how did you manage to how did
you manage to fortify
yourself psychologically let's say to go
commit yourself to an english literature
degree
well i was again i was very young
it was the slowest mark i had in high
school so
there was there was a little bit of a
paradox and i was only in the university
but it it came on as a bit of my own
metaphor
with with very sudden uh powerful
attraction and action
and the more i got into it the better it
was but also here
it wasn't there was another dynamic
factor because you just spoke of parents
and seeing that that's the territory
that you often enter a
a volunteer but normally i wouldn't
my father he came from very
hard circumstance mother not not
not alive i won't go into all of it but
he basically got the grade two or three
in newfoundland uh he was a smart man
and he did all sorts of hard work when
he was teenager
and when he finally went to work on the
base it was as a you know
dishwasher but he met some people
on the american base he knew and he
remember he was again one of these
stoics which i much more appreciate than
the gush
merchants of the day and the oprah
vacation the thing was he knew
and he never made a point of it that
had he had school could he have been
able to attend a real one
that he had this facility in this case
by the way it was with language
uh even though he was not a reader
because i've reasons i've given you
he had a taste for words and and
compressed experiences
and he met one or two very well educated
americans
and i think just by
being there with him knowing how much
i think it must have been a great pain
actually knowing how much
he knew that he had missed
and how how hell how amputated were his
ambitions by the non-education
that it seeped down to me that getting
one
uh was a was just something formidably
insistent and i i suppose
we all as you say appearance i suppose i
was trying
out of some sort of devotion to kind of
by surrogacy pick up what he could never
have gotten because of time and
circumstance
well it also it would also imply i would
say that
he at minimum didn't interfere with the
manifestation of that spirit in you and
i suspect would have encouraged it
both parents had great belief in one
thing
i love the old phrases by the way we
should bring them back do your books
if you don't make it through the school
you'll be digging ditches
marie my mother was like hiring my
father they had
a justifiably dutiful respect even in
some of the more ignorant instructors
that were in those presentation schools
but they knew that there was one way up
and i'm not speaking commercially not
speaking
with something attached to the dignity
of the person and
the amplitude of the personality only
gets released
by trying to imitate listen to
walk your mind around the minds of other
people
whose minds are better than your own and
that's what philosophy
literature i would expect your specialty
it is always those who have thought more
deeply more profoundly and have a
better equipment that give us things and
that's why i'm back now to the
university
that's why it's so deplorable that this
this
is just i'll use their words this is
petty fascism of
wokeness uh is suffocating
uh the number one energy of any
free society so now so how do you think
your parents
it's it's interesting how how do you
think your parents developed that
respect and why did they hold it
well harry my father uh because he was
he was certainly bright enough
to know when he heard other people i'm
speaking chiefy now the americans
with sophisticated understandings and
sophisticated things
he he saw the goal in in the rift
but he never had a chance to reach for
it so but then he and he was willing to
admire it rather than to be resentful
about it
absolutely he would he would listen to
these people he would remember some of
their sharpest lines
he had a great sense of humor he was he
was himself
a very good talker most newfoundlanders
are
and they often have a very good sense of
humor which is appreciation for words
well i i think that you know that that's
the second context
uh i i do remember you know the older
guys that i knew
and not just these folklore stories
either they could talk about
going in to buy a plug of tobacco and
hold you spellbound
that's actually something i've noticed
about um extremely
intelligent people who aren't educated
yeah they have a facility to
dramatize their lives that's really
quite spectacular where i grew up i had
friends who
were really not literate a number of
them
but they weren't stupid and they could
spin a story man it was impressive
and in a way i couldn't in some sense i
think i lost the drama
dramatic sense of my own life because of
the books i had been exposed to but
they were very good at that i i i your
point i
i've made this myself you might want to
tell us
uh that there's a whole lot of
illiterate newfoundlanders that may well
be
your choice but do not think do not
think that they're not some
the most verbally intelligent i'll i'll
tell you as a fact
i've done i don't know 100 200
documentaries
and i did a documentary on the
newfoundland fishery about 25 years ago
and i met a guy up in lansa meadows
fishermen
hard case heavy drinker i would guess
i'd i'd give him a grade two or grade
three but he walked out of his house on
a cold
frigid february saturday morning on
with the wind coming off the water and
then it kept
the air flaps out and he gave me an
answer to wanna come on to my questions
a five minute area i you know
i can already see that boat over there
it gives me a
a is a knob of me guts and a tear in the
eye is how it began
and i tell you uh outside of shakespeare
going on that was the most that was the
most
verbally charged anecdote
that i ever put on film frank when we
brought it back to the to the
national people were coming into the
edit room to watch this guy and as i
said
he may have been illiterate but by god
he knew his words
and that's another one by the way i
always admired
i think we called it uneducated that's
nonsense
so the smartest people i know probably
couldn't sign their name
but by god if you if you felt them if
you if you moved around them
i was always afraid of fishermen because
they were always smarter
not all of them but if you do it
together with one of them you got you
better be on your toes
anyway going on again okay so you and
you took an excess of
of courses at memorial so you were very
highly motivated what about your peer
group at that time
uh no that was they were more or less
again
they had a bit more uh i think
commitment to the idea of real education
as i'm calling it
then perhaps today i i think there's a
lot of just going for the credential
but moving on again i'll give background
more in particular because i'm going to
interrupt there i would say one thing
about undergraduates that i've observed
because i loved teaching
the undergraduates i had contact with
they would come into class with a veil
of cynicism and sometimes that was
while we're doing this for the grade or
we have a practical reason in mind but
if you could get
under that and communicate something to
them that was
genuine genuinely philosophical and
meaningful
they would drop that surface level
cynicism and dive into it like people
who were starving
well that if you will forgive a
reference back to you
uh the explosion that you set off
uh once the controversy had propelled
you into this
world arena and the number of
otherwise cynical minds i told you when
you and i
had a previous interview on that silly
channel that i have
i had this call i'm not going to name
him because it would be embarrassing a
55 year old uh
working in a really hard job and no big
money
and he actually called me up i hadn't
met you or anything
and he called me up to say that you know
what i've been reading jordan peterson
this is if if the teacher if the
guide offers something that is real
uh depth dignity spirit points towards
you know you are better than you are uh
speaks honestly there's another thing so
that's the advantage to something of
higher value it's like
of course you're lesser in relationship
to it but it's what you could become
to offer people what they could become
is the best possible thing you can do
for them
well i i've seen again maybe
mischaracterizing i don't think it's
deliberate but
uh insofar as there is a standing
champion leading
something of the counter rebellion
against the degradation
of analysis and thought and and the
casting aside
of cultural verities uh you're it
uh and you have by example and
and also true to great tribulation uh
you've given solace to a hell of a lot
of people and i think it has
a lot to do with something general in
the air that
there's a lot of suffocated minds
because
they feel the walls coming in they
wonder if they're alone
and then someone comes by and says
something in some cases nothing
insulting
some very obvious things but with a lot
of thought and energy and commitment
behind it
and as you know did
half the world arenas are affiliating to
hear anonymous voice
that's pretty good by the way
you went from memorial to oxford how did
that happen
i wondered scholarship there was
newfoundland because it had been
uh sorry you won a rhodes scholarship
yeah i won the road scholarship
uh 68 and uh again it was a
bit of my father i thought i wanted to
study law for some reason
when i got over there as as i think i
told you before we started here
uh i i entered into second year studies
with
any break i mean trust landlord i mean
just terrible stuff
and the weekly assignments but you're in
oxford
you got blackwoods you got some of the
greatest lectures
on english literature some of the
editors some of the
prime editors of some of the great
voices as i
you know helen gardner was t.s eliot's
friend for god's sake
and she's giving a lecture on dumb she
edited the done songs and sonnets
so i i became completely absorbed in i
did the law stuff
but i spent more time reading i never
read this much in my entire life
what was it like for you to to go to
oxford have you traveled at all
no no so this is the first time you've
been to europe i mean the reason i'm
asking in part is because i've met some
very educated englishmen
like stephen fry and it's really
something to
meet an educated englishman because they
have a depth of education that's just
quite stunning and it's so it's so
impressive when you see it manifest
itself and i've been fortunate enough to
talk with people at cambridge and oxford
who are scholars
from the old school let's say yeah it's
so it's so impressive to watch them talk
and to watch them think and so
you pulled yourself out of newfoundland
and
went over to oxford what how old were
you and what was that like
i was 19 i think i went to universities
very early uh what was it like um
i'd had as i mentioned uh five years in
memorial studying literature
i should have kept added about i should
have picked up a d film stayed away from
law
i met like you did i met some extremely
keen minds
i met a guy who could play uh debac de
cotta on the great organs and i met them
in all fields
and that was the only advantage of it to
me by then
maybe a bit young but nonetheless i i'd
settled in pretty well to english
literature
and it was that that kept dragging me
away as i was
just about to say i don't think i've
ever read more in a single year
than i did that year there well that's
the thing about university and i suppose
also about those english universities in
particular because you imagine what the
university
because i've tried to think well what is
the university part of it is
while this it's this continuous
conversation across
centuries part of it is the exposure to
the greatest
thinkers and and for for the purpose of
of mimicry essentially
i believe that's central to it because
you can pick your peers in some sense
that's what you do when you read great
books is you make these people your
peers at least insofar as you're capable
of doing that
and and but then there's also an
identity that it provides you with is
you're a student
you've got this time that's cut out and
now you can go
throw yourself into the study and and
society
has built a wall around you that says
you can stay in this room and you're
good read away we're happy about it
well that that that's it the one thing i
will remark and i don't care how
pretentious it sounds
in in one area i was a little
disappointed
uh i thought because of the reputation
of the university
uh that it would have a surplus it would
have an excess
of overbright people who listened to
late quartets of beethoven as they got
out of bed
i had a false notion that reality is
often
just day to day and while there will be
great exceptions and there were
and people were so bright that they
embarrassed you
if you were standing in front of them
but a lot of it was
apart from the architecture and the
grounds which is first class
it was nice to be there as a kind of a
visitor
but the intellectual level as i said i
probably didn't get out as much as i
should
but once i got near the libraries i
became enthralled
and that's the same word as enchanted
and charm i keep reminding people that
the art art has magic well and
i think it's really useful to point out
the connection between those words
because they all point to the possession
to the capacity to be possessed by this
spirit which
and it is the spirit that inhabits the
university when it's properly conducted
yes it's the spirit that that manifests
itself
as the creative and communicative
conversation that's gone across
centuries that you can now immerse
yourself in and become a part of
and there isn't anything better than
that that's that's that's as good as it
gets
that's also why it's so wonderful often
to be a
university professor or teacher is
because you can play a role in
transmitting that to
young people who will benefit immensely
from it in all possible ways
yeah it's very true it's also true again
i'm sure you have because you're in the
university context
i've met two or three uh i'd almost
compared them to
you know some of the great medieval
monks you meet one or two or three
people who are so
uh completely immured in
in the dignity of learning from the past
and pursuing great minds truly learned
people
uh they're almost always in a kind of
personal cloister
but there's one or two or three in the
course of a lifetime and you say there's
so
almost priestly about the human being
that gives to inquiry to learning
uh to the development and and
fulfillment of the mind
and you you just know you're in a very
special place now when i
i went to teach at harvard in the 90s
and i was privileged to have a position
there for five years six years i guess
and harvard pulled in senior professors
from everywhere who were at the top of
their profession and so
there was a handful of senior psychology
professors there
when i was there and it was wonderful to
talk to these people
i had never been anywhere where there
wasn't
anything i could say that they weren't
familiar with
it was so amazing there wasn't a topic i
could possibly
bring up that these and it would have
been six or seven people
which is actually a lot it was a small
department the the senior faculty were
absolutely
outstanding people especially the older
ones because they weren't only great
psychologists they were really educated
and so yeah yeah
and they weren't afraid of ideas at all
and
my mind ranges across ideas and
i'd often encounter people with whom i
could have a conversation about one
thing but definitely not about another
and i just never ran into that barrier
among the older senior faculty members
at harvard the junior faculty members
were impressive in their own right they
hadn't had the whole
advantage of a lifetime of study yet you
know they were headed in that direction
but
the senior faculty were remarkable and
you couldn't help but be immensely
uh what would you say to to to be
possessed by immense respect in their
presence
and it was a privilege to be there well
here's the other thing
for the people today that if the
universities become
proselytizers and and semi
political agent prop waltness and all
this garbage
they're stealing a lot of joy i mean a
real university as you as you just said
and dealing with people that are better
than you
that's the great thing incidentally uh
it's it's such a pleasure
and you don't have who has as you said
you're given freedom to do this
uh and and get credit for it as well and
you'll advance in society but the
simple joy of taking in
uh and especially the inhumanity i know
science has its ecstasies as well and
they're
probably even more powerful but the joy
of the humanity is that you as you said
you
you're talking to charles lamb i often
when i read his letters because he had a
very hard life i i take
great i almost oh i'm
allowed to not allowed i'm capable of
reading what a person up
in the early 19th century actually
thought and how he's
he's in the room that's a great
privilege too
see what i mean absolutely yeah we throw
away so many things that are under
at our elbow and we we search in vain
for things that are 20 miles away
it's it's awful
so okay so you were at oxford and you
were there for one year
yeah one year and and then what what
happened next
well he uh it found me very foolish as i
said i i started to think about it uh i
went to school
at four and i'd been going continuously
oxford was the sixth year of university
i think it was
and when i got home to newfoundland
during the summer break
i decided i'd take another break and
that's when i said i got to
i got to stop going to schools and there
was a job
when i i did some teaching i went on the
american base and taught some american
kids
and then uh literally and i know the
meaning of literally
uh i stumbled into a radio station in st
john's when i was doing some work on a
master's thesis
just idle work i had no money and they
gave me a job for the afternoon in the
newsroom
monday uh they signed me up for a month
to fill in for an open line host
and a month later i was working at cbc
so here that's it
uh my so-called career uh was
as accidental as walking into that
newsroom because i had a friend there
uh i i needed a bit of money i took on
the open line show with
no experience no and this is a
newfoundland overland show by the way
and uh started to write editorials for
the radio station
so why couldn't you do it like we talked
about your education
obviously that played a role but and
it's accidental in a sense but i mean
you've been preparing to use words for a
long time
yeah i had so so i mean it was an
accident waiting to happen in some sense
so you walked into the radio station but
what was it about what you were capable
of that opened up the doors
well i tell you newfoundland had another
advantage
newfoundland is a large part of every
newfoundlander in a way that other
problems
are not being parochial are perhaps not
perhaps
not and newfoundland politics when i was
growing up was the politics of this
writer he was legendary for sure joey
smallwood
he brought us into confederation he was
mercurial
he was he was another autodidact he was
another self-taught man
in the old sense oratorical the tommy
douglas kind of oratory
and newfoundland politics was both
cursing and entertainment and i often
said i've
wrote this that we put up with it
because on
other planes it gives us continuous
amusement
newfoundland has weather in politics and
they both exist as a form of
conversation and entertainment
and my father again was speaking the
words
listening to joey giving some great
tirade he just loved
to listen when small would let it loose
and a lot of new lenders did as well it
is a verbal culture i have no doubt
about that whatsoever
i never but journalism per se
i never aspired to it uh but once i got
in there
i found that if you'll forgive this i
found it very easy
and natural uh that you should write
things uh
i didn't think much of the writing by
the way i'm not being shy not being coy
i always because i have examples flannel
brian would be yet another one
uh and macklemug i met him once or twice
these were masters so there was always a
kind of not a chill but
a holding back but as you get older
there's not much to hold back anymore so
no it was accidental
but it just happened i then ended up in
cbc
that here and now program you referenced
at the very beginning and did that for
seven or eight years
it went through a few other places but i
always came back
and obviously once i came to toronto in
the middle
90s this is not 23 or 24 years
this has been the kind of most most
furious
uh commitment to the cause because i'm
i'm very
i'm very lethargic in thinking of it in
terms of any great seriousness
i like to think that i just assume you
were amused with something i said i
think i was right well often there's not
that much difference between those two
things
very true very true so okay so you were
you were working at here and now and and
how how often were you broadcasting a
show
every night i did usually one or two
interviews a night i also did
they were much briefer in those days i
also did i was the only one who did
actually
uh commentary i did two or three a week
i wrote uh i uncovered reviewed
concerts for certain national radio
programs and
write reviews of concerts uh on and off
i had a lot of
a lot of fires in the irons and a lot of
fires
but it just seemed more of a hobby it's
an easy word i don't know why i couldn't
find it
this is like you know it's something you
were half pleased to be doing and was
paying your rent that's that's been
journalism to me
i do not have uh this is high compulsive
sanctified idea of the great worth of
the journalists of the earth
they're the only people that i think
could be put in competition with the
politicians there are certain exceptions
i think glenn greenwald right now for
example in the last seven or eight
months
uncovering a lot of the mistruths of
journalism is doing a great job
but it was there i did enjoy doing it i
liked politics as a drama
uh and those therefore and i liked books
so you could okay i did book reviews as
well
so it all just came together in a
non-planned
but by inertia and uh and taste uh
something i stuck with
at this moment i'm talking with you
and so why do you think you had public
appeal
that's a really good question uh i was
always chastised
in the earliest part of the so-called
racket
why don't you i've ever written one one
column for the radio station
other people read it when before i get
the cbc
and the owner of the station he called
me in afterwards he
i he hired me to write the he had his
announcer read
and he i did this call uh and he calls
me into his office
he said what was all that about and so
an informal conversation
i gave him the gist of what i had
written and structured for the announcer
and then he looked at me why can't you
do that all the time
that was a problem that was a problem
with cbc as well they kept telling me
that you can't write like that and uh
that's too too
i have the totally different
understanding of communication
now here's another one this is this is
true i did a particularly savage thing
one night and in loubound you can be
much more savage than you can
in the delicate altitudes of toronto and
cbc believe me you can
you can draw blood on here if you have
the skill do you think there's a
consequence of it being a fun
fundamentally a working-class culture in
newfoundland uh yeah you're exposed more
you actually tasted more reality yeah
well i know
where i grew up was a working-class
culture and it like the the the verbal
barbs and exchanges were quite brutal
generally very very funny and also
brutal
when you when in my case because you got
really well known
in the in the island uh if you said
something the previous night and you
went out the next morning
uh i almost got chased a couple of times
but to go back to this one point about
communication
i did this savage thing attacked
mercilessly a lot of phone calls because
before the internet registered in
reaction when they came into cbc
one of the one of the cleaners was there
and he looks at me
rexy said well he said that was
something going over there last night
and i said god i said yeah he said by
the way he said
whose side were you on
here's the point communication even when
it's
verbal cars a lot more
tone tells you your sensibility
goes under the text a manner of delivery
gives an index of where it's going
i've had people from pakistan and don't
give me any old racist
pakistan and africa meeting the cabs in
the cabins of toronto
and i know they can't understand this
because they haven't yet picked up the
english
okay don't come back with any complaints
and they say oh
that was so good it always reminds me
that even was
hyperverbal though i might be in certain
ways that there's a deeper communication
especially in the mass media that has
never taken account
so what i was by their standards doing a
little bit of high style
you're communicating by your manners by
your eyes well that's one of the things
that
one of that's one of the things i think
that that makes you somewhat singular
among canadian journalists is that not
only
are you very able with your words
and witty with them and powerful with
them but
you're also markedly a dramatic
character
and i i don't i don't know exactly how
to separate the character from the pers
the person and maybe there is no
separation but
i watched you what watched you on cbc
and listen to you when
there's always drama in your
presentation there's there's a
performative action
aspect so it's it's romantic i suppose
is the right way of thinking about it is
because that's the the effective union
of emotion and
and rationality and and you embody that
so it's like watching someone put on a
performance
although it's well and then i suppose
you've been doing this for so long
i don't know how much of it is a
performance and how much of it is you
it's very effective well i know one
thing that
that long use has given i found the
hardest
and this was the only conscious part i
think the hardest thing to do if you're
in
the television business don't go into it
now
it's on its way out but if you're in
there is to
gradually reduce to extinction
the gap between i use this phrase in the
comment
recently preparing a face to meet the
faces that you meet the gap between oh
i'm on a camera and therefore i got to
do this i got to say it's this way and
all this stuff
when you can bring the prepared remark
identically with a totally relaxed being
and if you mean it i used to say this
five or six columns a year are
commentaries that i really meant
and if you really mean it you could go
on stammering
and people would listen to you reducing
the gap between the posture
or the posturing and i'm talking to a
neighbor today
so well so one of the things i've really
observed because i've done a lot of
television interviews now and i've yes
and a lot of this sort of discussion
which i
radically prefer which i think is
immensely superior but
so in the typical television interview
i would walk into the studio and i would
meet the interviewer and we would have a
cordial and professional conversation
but i was actually
talking to the person more or less and
then the cameras would go on
and yeah the person was no longer there
at all i know and i know so then i was
trying to figure out well what's exactly
there and
well part of it was the the the person
in some sense didn't dare to be there
because the bandwidth was extremely
expensive
and if you're there being spontaneous
you can make spontaneous errors and and
and that can be very costly to you and
to your network and so
so frequently i was just talking to
whoever it was
acting out the role of the journalist
they thought their
station demanded and so there was no
conversation and
some of the conversations interviews
that i've had that have gone viral were
exactly like that where
it wasn't a conversation what whatever
it was was something completely
different
but this this there's something
essential about what you said with
regards to this
diminishment of the gap between the
persona and the
and the person and so the persona
this is from the psychology of carl jung
jung thought about the persona as a
crafted presentation
that you used for expedient purposes
absolutely and so maybe you walk into a
bank and you do a transaction and you're
the customer and
she's the teller or he's the teller and
there's a script there and that's fine
that's where a persona works because
you don't want to get personal while
you're just you know exchanging business
information
but in a conversation it's a different
thing because
the persona is something that isn't
genuine and
what that means is the questions aren't
genuine and if the questions aren't
genuine then it's not
interesting you said you can stammer and
stumble about as long as you mean it
and you can and what is it do you think
about
what is it well you talked also about
the non-verbal component
what do you think is carrying the
the sense that you mean it what are
people observing in the performance
let's say or in the presentation
there's an intensity yes
it really is and i know this is straight
that's a really
good question i always knew
uh it's intuition that when you showed
up on television especially
in the role of commentator and interview
instantly
if i was pretending it bled out through
the screen
now of course sometimes you're having
fun and you're not being serious you do
all sorts of but
in the ones i i used to like to say the
ones that really count
if you put on a face the radar
of human beings the radar of every human
being
especially again in this public thing
they know it's wrong politicians i
remember i did a thing on the national
every time the politician comes to an
election this is true of mr harper whom
i like
as it was of mr trudeau in particular
that the voice that starts to come out
of them in their commercials
is like something that's never been
heard on heaven or earth before
they actually change their vocal tone
uh when they give out their problem
they may as well hang a sign around her
next saying i'm lying to you now because
you can hear the way i talk
in the cases that you're describing
there's so much in television and media
interviews that's simply dishonest
these little conversations you described
having before you started the interview
and i know you must have experienced
this i know a lot of journalists who use
those as
kind of a set up for a sucker punch put
the smiley face on oh i love you like
jordan etc oh yes that's happened then
as soon as the lights go on
the lack of integrity in these things is
just
savage but those people uh
maybe intellectuals it's something like
orwell's famous thing i only
let you to believe it sometimes it's
only intellectuals who can't
see the point educated
in a formal sense but not in a real
sense there's something so stupid that
you have to be extremely intelligent
to perform it and news guys and those
ladies who think that
they can out cute the guests and
get them see they're not they're not not
even not going for a conversation
they've decided in advance that they're
constructing a moment
factitious is the recovery word for that
it's constructed
and they only want that so you can be
passing off the wisdom of plato socrates
and jesus in a single sentence
and they're still grinding in their
heads i have
i have the net ready i'm going to drop
it on any minute
not even listening to you it's not an
interview it's a plot
well that's why i'm hoping that these
long form videos are
transformative i've interviewed a couple
of are interviewed
i've had a discussion with a couple of
political figures and
that is going to continue i hope i
believe that
in a two-hour discussion you reveal
yourself
i don't think you can help it and you
might reveal yourself as someone who's
covering up so they can't won't reveal
themselves yeah that's revealing in and
of itself
it is i used to say that when especially
doing political interviews in
newfoundland
i remember one cab diminished in
particular said well he said
you asked me a lot he said but you never
got me to say it
and i told him i said you're not saying
it was the interview
you know there's always a reality
and unfortunately now in public
communications from when i started
and this is not nostalgia to the present
moment
uh the the oppressive complete not
completely
so many of the press organs have just
dropped uh all the essential attributes
of news gathering and information and
have become partisans
have become propagandists uh our
advancing agendas
all under all we are the guardians of
the democracy
okay well so from the post-modern
perspective at least
how it's generally put forward with its
neo-marxist surround
there's the proposition is something
like
all language games are games of power
and so whether you think
you're doing it or not you're putting
forward an agenda and if you can't see
that that's just
a sign that you're completely yeah so
but now you made a distinction
between real journalism and this false
journalism that you're decrying
what do you think are the
characteristics of genuine journalism
well the first of the the the old
bromide that
everyone has a bias well of course they
have a bias they have life
but we talked at the very beginning of
this for a long time about education
and what education is in another domain
is fashioning deliberately fashioning
your mind
to be able to stand beside itself to be
able to stand outside and
look at those things that by temperament
or disposition or social situation
you have automatically come to accept we
have the power of self-scrutiny
and so let us let me make an easy
example i i love john diefenbaker and
i'm going to
deliberately going back as a person and
i'm going to vote for him as a citizen
but i'm a journalist and he comes to my
town of saint john
and he does a bad stumble and he makes
an awful mess of this
and whatever and i said to myself well
this is don dieberg i love him
so i'm going to hold that one back well
no you're a journalist and you say
even though on a personal level i'm
going to go with him i have the capacity
to see that he really messed up here
this was stupid this was wrong so i'm
going to report it
that's the interior of every person has
control over their bias and while we
will never be perfect
in expunging it we all have a
responsibility to examine
where we are on our own personal
domain and if that's the case then if
you're covering
politics and you let yourself be
agitated by the emotions of either
hatred or love
and do damage to the ones you hate and
puff up the ones you love you're lying
and the idea that you because we all
have bias that therefore you go to the
ridiculous extreme
of not only indulging it but injecting
it into everything
every story and every story meeting that
you have
journalists want to have about what i
tell you about one of the silliest
phrases
in western journalism is speaking truth
to power
this is when i always go back to your
hero sultry
if you want to know what speaking truth
the power is
to have 10 years in in siberia
have it to tyranny visit your family
that's speaking truth to power these are
sacred words
and you get it over here when someone
makes a jab at
a donald trump dear god it's a comedy
so you were eight years with here and
now
uh yeah eight years in newfoundland
every night five
five nights a week and
traveled all over the province right so
you're traveling everywhere you're doing
book reviews you're doing
uh classical music reviews so you're
continuing your education in a major way
yeah yeah that's why i have one most
that i'm not ashamed of
i i've never stopped liking english
literature it wasn't the door to closed
when you walked into the university
uh i'm reading sir thomas brown right
now i read him
45 years ago as well i never the
enthusiasm and
energy that comes from the best writers
you've adverted to
the best matthew arnold the best that
has been taught and said
uh is still there and that's an almost a
surprising thing
that even at this very nocturnal hour
uh the kind of exuberance that you had
at 20
still lingers in the chambers of
music and literature well that's
something that's
yes i would say so obviously something
indicating the lasting benefit of a of a
yeah of a genuine education in the
humanities it's it's an inexhaustible
source of
of what exactly well we said mimicry of
the great spirit that animates the ages
right how could that you simply get no i
like your description
because that it's not often presented as
a and now of course
the the idea that education is for the
job i do know how important jobs are i
come from
newfoundland uh but there's a whole set
of spirits as you know you've met them
that also say that there's another
target
in education and that's that you just
spoke of it
you remember always john the better to
enjoy life or the better to endure it
i don't think there's a better short
description of what education is
no i had a vision at one point of of the
people many people
who were influential to me in my life
these were
this particular vision mostly involved
men and
and so it was like a review in my mind
of men that i had seen that had been
influential to me and then
it was like there was something behind
that that was the greater men that i had
been exposed to
as a as a as a student to people i had
read and identified with i mean
when i found someone a thinker that i
that captured me
i tended to read everything i could that
they had produced
and i would fall into their mode of
thinking it would take me over
completely and then i'd re-emerge
somewhat on the other side changed but
but then i could see behind those great
thinkers there was
something else and i think that's
something that you know people think
about that as the
ancestral god the ancestral father and
and that was the spirit that was shining
through the great men i had read and
then all the people that had influenced
me it's shown through what was great
good and great about them by the way
good
good and great you're committing
terrible sins here
these these adjectives are now off of
limits
uh the idea of good and great
mathematics
this is where they did well it's the
association
it's the association with power as soon
as you buy the
by the doctrine that any hierarchical
organization is predicated on power then
obviously the higher up you are in that
hierarchy the more corrupt you are
so you might say well what so what what
do you lose from that because you lose
your sense of inferiority in
relationship to the better
well what you lose is the better and
that's fine if you're good enough the
way you are
and but i've never met anyone who felt
that they were good enough the way they
were
there's always clamor inside your soul
for more the more that you could be
and where else are you going to find it
except among those who have deemed been
deemed to be the best
and it and it isn't arbitrary right you
said when you went to university
you'd hear these words and they would
hit you you called them benign
explosions
that's not indoctrination by your by
your educators
that's introduction to the benign
explosions
well that particular professor all he
did i i can still hear it
uh it's about making a guess here it's
about a 42-line simile
he just read it and i i mean it was like
beethoven's fifth because milton does
have a certain power of expression
and you're right there was no message
attached
he didn't say even by the way no message
saying that you must like this
it was just done and let the spirit
respond
as the spirit will but this is this
fashioned education this fashion you go
to university now to
to be to be injected with attitude
not thought and some of these these
white
uh programs and the new anti-racism
which is all identity and
and you only read things from the tribe
to which you belong
i know enough about newfoundland i want
to read about the trojan war
not the war on the southern shore i mean
really
they're canceling homer they're
canceling shakespeare they're making fun
of mathematics they're
talking about white physics i do not
know how we wandered so easily into this
terrible and dominating lunacy have you
seen the latest
statement by the president of the cbc
catherine tate
following the the the george lloyd
the george trial down in the states i
mean it's like it's like a parody
of of virtue thinking and how cbc is
going to take notice of this and the
systemic racism cbc and all that
dear god i i spines
requires calcium and there's no milk in
cbc
none how did i get under that i'm not
even sure all right so you're you're
eight years in newfoundland you're
traveling all over the province you're
you're listening to people you're
watching their reactions to your shows
you're
you're reading how much how much do you
read how and habitually
oh two three four hours a day uh there
was periods when i
i i was out for a while i could go for
eight or nine
but i have books in the morning i have
books in the evening and of course this
stuff here the internet
uh has diluted uh some of that traffic
but
i i do have a fair store i also by the
way i
this is a good point to make for people
who are going
rereading uh as an avocado has pointed
out you can't read enough
you can only reread it i find great
pleasure
i've reread johnson's letters for
example recently
uh even the anatomy of melancholy which
is a bit of a task
proofed re-read so i do that a lot
i find that it's a refreshing uh that
you borrow
power not power in any militaristic or
or status sense how about authority
well it teases your brain and yeah i
i if you you get thrown into a mood in
which the actions
of the mind are more prompt and more
precise
it's mood you can't you can't claim i
i will now say this you have to wait for
the damn word to come to you
and but this puts you in that
advertisement well see that's a mystery
too right that's a mystery yeah
that element of thought and you know
people uh
people are easily cynical about prayer
but it seems to me that there isn't much
difference in posing a question to
yourself
and waiting for an answer then there is
i don't distinguish between that in some
sense in prayer and prayer
because the act of receiving revelatory
thought which is
the thought that bubbles up is it seems
to me that you pose yourself a question
and if your intent is genuine you want
the answer you don't want something
comfortable which
is uncomfortable in itself mysteriously
the
something will arise and the less you
put that persona that you described
between you and the source upon which
you call
the more likely you are to be rewarded
with the words that are correct
yeah you that being you is a very
strange idea because it it
it happens of its own accord in some
sense
the book i was referring to way back and
i said i wouldn't quote the title by
kessler
called the act of creation and it was an
analysis of
literary insight or literary inspiration
uh humor the discovery of the punchline
and mathematical the eureka moment
i think i've read that i think i read
that as an undergraduate it's a long
while ago but
it is precisely your point i have i have
a puzzle in my mind
i'm trying to find a phrase or if i'm a
mathematician i have a real positive
reconnect
and at a whole series of time
i have no answer i can't get it uh i go
out and
sloppily make a cup of tea and as i'm
stirring the first
cube of sugar oh i got the answer what
was the difference between the two
minutes before
and the time that this thought exploded
in your you had to have your mind
prepared for the thought to have a place
to pop
okay so you just used that phrase
explosion again you talked about the
benign explosions that
introduction to literature set off okay
so there's a thematic relationship
between those two ideas and
yeah we already talked about the idea of
mimicry and so
you know what you do in part when you're
educating yourself by pursuing what's
see what appears to you to be meaningful
and true is you build that spirit inside
of you
that's it and then that's the thing
that's informing you when you ask
questions yeah and you should build that
spirit out of
you build that spirit out of what the
best out of the best the past has to
offer you and there's markers for that
and the markers are that aesthetic
that aesthetic uh grip right it's not
something that someone can impose on you
it doesn't work
it has to be you meet it halfway
and so one you know when we have a
conversation like this
that that's spontaneous what i'm trying
to do when i have a conversation like
this is to become
transparent in some sense i don't want
my concerns about the podcast let's say
the quality of the podcast the audience
any of that i don't want those
proximal concerns to interfere with my
immersement
in the conversation and if i do that
correctly and open myself up then
there's a spontaneity about the dialogue
and that seems to be
associated with the search for and the
discovery of
some additional truth we have to uh
personally one of the words that that
classic phrase man prepare to face to
meet the faces that you meet
anytime we artificially or
self-consciously
construct ahead of time some personal
interaction
which is what a conversation really is
if we go in with the scaffolding
already prepared in there it's kind of
an armor
nothing can happen uh you have you've
put yourself
in in in the closed container
and you've done the right ritual moves
your other point is also very
interesting
you don't care about the damn podcast
and the quality no
don't don't these are not only
these are secondary they're collateral
or adventitious
but if you want to have a chat make the
chat the thing and even there you don't
you don't
make it too deliberate you just you sit
you speak and back and forth i don't
know by the way how i'm doing on this
but that's not the point excuse me the
point on this one is very simple
that we have to allow some channel
for the impulses that we don't
understand call of duty unconscious
common
column sensibility the impulses that we
we don't command but they are there and
occasionally they emerge
solving the problem having a
conversation making a quick joke in the
middle of a live conversation
it's a great mysterious thing we're not
nearly as metaphysical
as we should be uh people should pay
more attention to the spirit even if
they're not religious
because there's a whole aura i come back
to that word again
there's a whole aura around how we do
things and how we are
why do you you have used that word
continually why
why aura what what is it that well
that's magical about that
conceptualization well two things in
that it is ineffable that's the first
thing that it is it is a sheen or a halo
effect
but it is not not to be seen by the eye
but there is from some center or maybe
it's not a center maybe maybe
but from some place we derive
psychological and intellectual energy
that we can't command but that in in
some ways we can prepare for as you've
said by stocking the mind as best you
can there are elements in
our areas of the highest thought
that are structured logically and
research and all of these but there's
one other thing besides
and i call it aura mainly because of its
substantiality its invisibility but also
its link to something that's close to
magic or
close to religion and you can choose
either of those two terms
so there's there the phrase that left to
mind when you were
describing that was the preparation of
the temple for receipt of the divine
revelation
and well i studied i i spent a lot of
time reading carl rogers carl rogers
psychologist a counselor clinical
psychologist
a humanist but originally a christian
seminarian
deeply influenced by protestantism and
he
he wrote very deeply and practically
about
listening and talking to clients and and
he insisted upon a certain
kind of genuineness that if you were
operating properly as the therapist that
there were now no persona tricks you
were fully there yeah
integrated body and mind integrated and
there's something about that it's
things have to line up all the way down
to the bottom
properly and the more that happens the
the better the quality of the revealed
word it's something like that and
you prepare that in part by exposing
yourself to great thoughts because they
also
yes eradicate the dross and and the dead
wood and
and the impediments to that movement of
thought upward
and so while you're reading all the time
and pulling in these great thoughts and
the spirit that animates the great
thoughts as well
you're also feeding that part of you
that responds when you call upon
yourself to answer ques
it's why i've stressed in my writings
honesty in speech
because you you have to rely on this
capacity for
creative revelation to to guide you
through the darkest
possible times of your life when you
have nothing else to guide you
if you've corrupted yourself with
deceptive speech and therefore deceptive
thought
you won't that that won't be there won't
be anything there that's reliable when
you
call on it desperately
yeah i saw that you you made that point
i think in one of your
uh recent comments doesn't matter where
but where you point out that some people
go to university and say okay i'm going
to bend
uh to the current dilapidated regime i'm
going to pretend
that i i i adore all their sanctities
but as soon as i get out of university
and i got the goddamn piece of paper
uh then i'm going to start fighting back
and you wrote back or replied
if you start lying and you make a habit
of it
i'm paraphrasing obviously uh you won't
walk out as easy as you think
and you either you either start from
that point or you don't and if you
if you make that your persona sometimes
the persona takes over the person
that oscar wilde is familiar with that
one other thing i'd like to add
just throw in there when you talk about
getting so close to truth remember also
words themselves as
words if there is a place for
enchantment
and enthrallment and charm uh
orpheus with his loot made trees
remember that he could communicate
with inanimate music in that case but
language also
i think one of the highest hardest
sentences
in already is the very first one there
in the beginning was the word uh i mean
words are actors uh
we have major control over them i think
but they have an
internal they have an internal force
they have a residual force they are
magical
uh hence poetry hence ecclesiastes book
of job
you know them better than i uh i don't
know
if we ever penetrated that but i do know
that language in its individual
terms and its actual words
has latencies of
of of disposition and force
yes it's right to think of them as
active agents
yeah i'd like to hear you on that
so you watch every word and you watch
every phrase and you watch every
sentence and you try to get the rhythm
right and you try to get the harmony
right and
you you then you attack what you wrote
and you see if
it can withstand the assault that you
can bring to it and maybe you do that
50 times to see if you can craft
something that you cannot improve no
matter how hard you try
and that you can't break no matter what
you
bring to bear upon it well again
as i said i got sometimes the very
simple sentence i mean
how can i how could i explain or
explicate would be better
that particular sentence in the
beginning was the word
they're all single syllables
prepositions a definite article
and in the beginning was the word
there's
always again there's there's always that
extra outside
uh contribution that comes from the
language itself and putting
i sometimes think the catalysts the
great tradition of the capitalists that
they're my mute examination
of the of the intrinsic terms
uh the individual letters uh it may seem
like a superstition
but i i i think of it less a
superstition
than as a kind of mildly encouraged path
to a certain
insight there is more things in heaven
on earth than i dreamt of in our
philosophy
i i wish the universities again go back
to our theme here it seems to go through
in dealing with literature in particular
in history those kinds of subjects
would would pay much more attention to
also giving your
your students the capacity uh to imitate
those writers
best writer in america in certain ways
is abraham lincoln isn't that an amazing
thing
uh his inaugural address is oh my lord
they have power enough that when martin
luther king came by
some hundreds of years later that they
were operating in his brain they were
they were a living dynamic
every drop of blood drawn by the last
should be paid for one drawn by the
sword
uh you know once we acknowledge that
words
continue to have their some of their
original dynamic
if they have been placed in the mind and
if they're kept up anyway i know i'm
rambling and i'm
slightly more than incoherent we tell
our students
right we should tell our students just
what you're telling them now
which is that you watch your reaction to
the words
and you note the awe that's generated
spontaneously and you take note of
the worship that you've just
participated in
despite yourself as the marker to what
constitutes
truth well i i think you have it uh
we will never fully comprehend the
operations of
of our own full consciousness
uh either it's it's it's it's
it's beneficial or not beneficial but we
do know
that spiritu the spirit
whether religious or however you want to
describe it that there are elements that
will not be put down in the account book
because they cannot be tabulated they
cannot be named at least at this point
you're in in a clinical circumstance
you're partly scientist
and you'll we will go as far as the
evidence can lead you in the physical
properties
but there are aspects and dynamics of
all human action
that come from inspiration the word put
in
inspiration to breathe uh the demon that
you referred to
in all creation we the ancient poets
sought that
our ancient philosophy that the poets
were possessed well they were possessed
something for a while herman melville
great example 25 26 years old
and produces what is probably the only
text
i'm using a 80s word the only text that
could be placed
pretty close to a bible he flooded
his mind his mind was a volcano for
about a year and a half that he did
he never wrote like it after never equal
anyone who reads
and by the way he was fired by the bible
by shakespeare and by milton
these are i'm confirming what you've
said so often here
you get in touch with the best and the
best get in touch with you
it's just again a it's a marvelous field
that's also
a terrifying thing it's a terrifying
thing that
a real university education or real
education introduces people to because
there's some
terrible fire that's associated with
best because it does burn off everything
in you that isn't worthy and
that tends to be an awful lot well in
my case it's everything so don't bring
the match close
so okay so you're eight years with here
and now and then what happens
uh odds and ends of things uh one thing
that is probably
interesting for the public side here is
that
at one point in my own flaws
i was out of work and i i i'm going to
subtract a lot of detail because
time only i ended up as an executive
assistant
to the opposition leader for about 17
months
and i wrote question period for the
newfoundland assembly i wrote it for the
caucus
and because it was newfoundland
i got inside i didn't want to do this by
the way
i dreaded accepting the political
appointment but
i wasn't working so i did on and in
hindsight
it was one of the most useful things
i've ever done because apart from being
the guy on the mountainside with
binoculars staring at the bird you're
actually in the damn room
i heard what politicians think of
journalists
i heard what journalists obviously think
of politicians
there's a 30 ignorance ratio on both
sides
and never been cured but it also
really educated me sensitized me
to what what are the buttons that you
press if you were if you go back to the
journalists
then i ended up writing some stuff
and i did this a piece i did on
newfoundland in particular the fisheries
this was the i somehow ordered struck a
chord
rather widely and so this is when the
cod stocks were collapsing
this was the account what years what
years was this 1992
93 would probably be i i may be off on a
year or two but
that was i did a half hour it was the
year oh
and had an unparalleled wealth of of
fishery
and miraculous and its bountifulness
that was decimated entirely never
recovered
it is it is the entire reason that it
exists the language comes out of the
fishery
this the nature of the settlements all
those small places where
they went there because it was a beach
and place to fish
the sense of humor the stoicism that you
will find in some
uh certainly the inventiveness in song
and chat
because you're you were really isolated
and
people met only on the water there was
so much tied up with that
that that collapsed was as much
psychologically
for the first time in 500 years you
couldn't take a codfish out of the water
so i did a piece on that and as i said
it obviously struck some cords
and the next thing i knew i was being
offered three or four jobs in various
places
i read of of cod schools that were 300
miles long
hundreds of feet deep yeah hundreds of
miles wide
and composed primarily of fish that were
three to five feet
long that were so plentiful you could
hold them up in buckets that was the
yeah that was the origin that was the
original cod fishery
it was a joke you could walk across
harbors on the backs of cotton
it was and it by the way the sustenance
for
inactive terms 300 years of all these
wonderfully small
places that also nourished because they
were truly cut off i keep saying this
you were in present bay you weren't in
fortune bay and you weren't in saint
mary's bay
and therefore being so isolated
the drive to make things uh either for
utility
or for recreation to invent practices
they brought mumming over from
mummering over from england uh folk song
some of the newfoundland folk songs as
literature have not been studied
but they are so inventive even the list
of names
uh kelly rooseve you tried to do it
yourself
so it did also kind of fostered
by force independence there wasn't too
many other people around to help you
so if you don't do it yourself you're
going to be in a hard spot
it had a lot of virtues but it had a lot
of faults
the lack of health and education being
the two principal ones
how many futures were amputated
because you grew up in a place where
there was no school
and there was no health how many
you know this this is thomas gray in the
english church
how many mutant glorious militants it
was hard it was cruel
but it was rich it was rich in things
again
uh that individuals and communities
and so what were you writing what were
you writing that caused such a stir
i i just i wrote looking back at it now
it was
basically analogy i called it on
people's shores
and that comes from another uh was it
here the tide flows and here they had ed
not with that dull unsigned tread of
waters
that move along on people's shores
that's a poem
written in 1930 about newfoundland and
basically i was simply stating that the
soul and i mean it
solid newfoundland was being blistered
and evaporated uh once you
kill the cultural economic linguistic
source of
the being of the place i go so it was
just a reckoning we talked mainly to
fishermen that that
poet i met on the northern northeast on
saint anthony's
atlanta meadow farmers by the way that's
a good point to make
farmers gave it the most response of
most letters i've ever received
and i wonder why you know fishermen are
not farmers was it
very simple their grandfathers had
received
uh salt fish from the newfoundlanders in
the dirty thirties
when they when they parry dust bowls and
all the drought was going on
newfoundland which was then just a
country
somehow got barrels of salt fish over
the prairie farmers
they remembered it and when they saw the
fishery collapse
i'm serious thousands of these were
letters not emails you had to actually
write and stamp them
and three quarters from the prairies i
always thought that when i learned that
i thought that was a nice thing to kind
of associate with canada
the understories are much better than
the newspapers
what kind of consequences were there for
for that writing
uh it was a point where the story met
someone who liked basically on me uh met
the person who
was close enough to it to do with some
justice
but it was the voices on i'm not one of
these shy boys
it was the voices uh of of the fishermen
that i interviewed and
also some officials it all
dropped into a harmony 22 or 23 minutes
so you really see
i'm not bragging in the stating and
because
uh most canadians again
despite the apologetics that come out
every single damn day from ottawa how
about
how miserable and hateful we are at the
national disposition in the main
it's not confined to any group either is
you know
a reasonably lively interest in the
bearings of other people and when
they're having a hard time
if there's any way we can intercede or
at least offer you
verbal comforts we're going to do it and
when the farmers
farming and fishing are very much like
in some ways a small farm
in shore fishery in the family farm they
saw it
and uh their their native theirs their
identity as citizens
that's what i want to say their identity
is citizens
uh was the preeminent one of that moment
and when i think of identity politics i
often ask
and i think it should be asked a lot
more when you go to university
your identity there is a student
and when you go to a university or you
go to nepal your identity there
is public servant the idea that you can
concentrate your being into one small
superficial attribute uh is is nonsense
but the effect on me was i ended up here
i came up here
again i'm not not good on dates 94.95
and here is toronto yeah it's continuing
from the periphery so to speak from
completely different
toronto absolutely what happens when you
move to toronto
uh not a lot as i said by that time both
parents had gone
um i had the the
job at the national uh commentary in
interviews
and stuff and at cbc radio
but i was introduced to a degree i had
never been before
to the full play of politics in a really
large province
ontario 10 million and because i was
working at the national
politics on the national scale and
uh also there's another small dimension
i i somehow ended up being reasonably
popular as
as a speaker all sorts of things and
that gave me more opportunities
than not financially they were they were
financial too
but i ended up in so many places
addressing so many different groups
everything from fishermen to academics
to nurses to librarians
and over a 20-year period just dropped
me in and out of a hell of a lot of
places
and met a tremendous host
of different people different
occupations
and there's a second that would be part
of the reason why in some sense you have
a national voice right because all those
people that you've met they echo inside
of you in the same way that the
books that you've read echo inside of
you i think the traveling
under those hospitals you always you
couldn't your schedule was too thick
but i could always almost always linger
for a day or two
and the various associations uh also
by the way here's another thing public
speaking is is a great pleasure
and it's a bit of an art and i was
fortunate at this stage uh to be given
other stages
in which to keep practicing it you know
again you've done hundreds but you i did
30 or 40 a year
uh you you learn the arts of public
communication
that's a great bit of fun by the way and
you
take it but you're right on that thing
that getting across the camp countries
seeing how alberta is different from
british columbia new brunswick is
different from
northern i can go on this this country
is
is fluid uh it has an underlying
sentiment apache mr trudeau there are
core values in canada uh and they should
be stood up
and emphasized a hell of a lot more but
this was again this is the second part
to practical education
uh you get out you're not in toronto all
the time and while i don't dump on
toronto
per se uh if you get within its charm
circle
uh you become one of the mental heard
the set of
synonymous attitudes uh among the
cognizant
and journalists in this city uh is bali
and i think that's reflective of
something that happens in the in the
in north american culture yeah at least
as far as the united states and canada
are concerned
that also happens at the level of the
intellectual elite and there's
seems to be something like a very
distinct sense of contempt
that emanates from that it's certainly
something that people who aren't in
toronto react
to react what
identify with toronto and react against
and it is it is the kind of
irritation that drives the populism for
example
yes exactly donald trump so popular
exactly
i've seen that in the contempt that
reviewers continually express
for my hypothetical followers like i
don't think i have followers i think i
have viewers and watchers and readers
and
and even if they were the people they're
parodied to be i don't see any real sin
in communicating with them
in in in in whatever capacity i can
manage but
there's always a dripping contempt that
is that is
associated with the hoi polloi let's say
who
you know need such bromides and so forth
well it's very true i mean in your
particular case uh
uh is low law low intelligence
snobbery uh a kind of
absolutely brazen snark by people again
don't need to flatter you haven't read
as much don't know as much
but it is a verification of their
standing within this little
particular guarded sect uh and
the opinions here have to be the only
opinions it's almost like bloomsbury
uh at a heavily discounted level
uh i was i offered here i wondered in
your case too
in the very very beginning when the
university of toronto was sending those
letters
i i kept asking what's the point of
tenure
if all these great tenured professors at
the university of toronto
when one of their owners being
disparaged and to some degree threatened
by these unemployment terms why
why aren't they out on the principle uh
it seems to have just
gone away and i don't know that's i
don't think that's particularly toronto
mentality but it's certainly no there's
been
basically radio silence from my
colleagues let's see yeah it is
it is just it's very strange even even
the level of success of the books
i mean any serious engagement review
full scale of of any of the three uh
doesn't take place and they and then the
kind of agitated morons on twitter uh
dropping their low iq bombs from a great
height
i don't know why this is the case it
makes you it makes you melancholy
and i don't know we're able to fix it
actually i wonder how far we can go
along these paths
before we degrade and degenerate well
what have you seen
happening what have you seen happening
you've been observing our country
and the culture for a long long time and
yes you don't have any particular acts
to grind as far as i can tell so
what what's happening in the cultural
sphere as far as you've concerned over
the last
say well pick a point and move i'd say
that
i would say the last 10 or 15 we we know
origins and i won't go through all that
and we know about the 60s
but in terms of visible evidentiary
impact it's the last 10 or 15. the first
thing that i've seen that i
resent is the idea
tacitly held never explicitly made
public
uh that there are certain perspectives
on the world that are okay
and we hold them and therefore we're
better and any dissent from them or
disagreement with them or
an alternate set is not to be not to be
allowed
half the reason i'll give it an
illustration after reason the cbc
audiences
collapsed and shrunk to such a vast
extent they did is that cbc was only
interested in talking to the people who
agreed with it
and that's a much more narrow bunch than
ever no i've watched my parents and
and their reaction to cbc i mean we were
avid cbc listeners when i was a kid
especially to fm
and and it was everywhere in canada and
but also of course
television as well but radio we'll
concentrate on radio
it was always of high quality and it did
seem to speak to the whole country it
did a credible job as it's
a national broadcaster and then all of a
sudden and it is
probably 15 years ago everyone i know in
the west
just stopped listening it was like no
this isn't us anymore
it folded up and went away i could tell
you that
not regarding attacking them i i waged a
small
minor almost silent rebellion within
i tried to get something out there
whenever i was traveling in the last 10
or 15 years
it was the most frequent phrase i'd ever
hear i'm not watching it anymore i'm not
watching it anymore
and it's accelerated greatly uh the
events
in the states mr trump's election maybe
to a degree brexit over across the
border
has has become attended with or is
present simultaneously with this new
uh wokeness this critical race theory
the imposition of anti-bias uh
the hypers and i think effective
sensitivity of the business university
and even the health community to the
more fashionable virtue contests
mr trudeau uh apologizing almost every
six days
i've written three or four columns
saying if you do it these apologies
great ahead
we have our faults but every now and
then find something good to say
we have stripped the nation of its
self-confidence that's one thing
we have alienated and put out in the
outer darkness
a vast portion of the population they
are not listening to its cultural
leaders or the illuminati or the cleric
people are afraid a political
correctness
is a very feeble phrase to cover the
psychological landscape in which people
uh of moral character are afraid to say
what is extremely obvious
we're polluting the political system
and the intellectual system and finally
aside from you uh on a large scale
aside from you no one is resisting this
this is
this this tidal force
uh that is emphatically cheapening the
culture and
shatter not chattering by piecemeal
graduation canada
law professor at queens has been
a what would you say a truthful
communicator with me and
i also like david salway janice
finango's husband
he writes some very strong stuff okay so
you've seen this and you don't think
it's just the miasma of a cranky old man
i mean that's no okay why not and what
do you think about the trudeau
government just out of curiosity
and i don't mean i don't really mean
politically i mean culturally i know
because
i've looked at so many governments and
you you you do
seem to me to be someone who gives out
praise when praise is due and
i certainly hope i do on the praise
front uh two through two or three things
uh there is in the
in the case of trudeau not on the
partisan level
i think his view of canada is not only
wrong that it has no core values and
that there's no
nonsense uh i i
vehemently uh am against the
propaganda side of obviously all his
private
meaning personal all his private
so-called commitments this farcical
global war on being the worst
but also he adopted despite his own
personal stuff
he adopted the walk persona to the nth
possible degree
and why do you say he adopted that
persona rather than being it
i mean do you think that's calculated is
there something
under i don't know trudeau is there any
like do you know him personally at all
have you ever talked to him when he was
oh yeah i i had one
hour session but i'm not basically
remarks on that but what i will base it
on
is that and i'm not trying to be harsh
without cause
that if for some reason it was
fashionable to have
exactly the other set of opinions the
opposite
they would be just i think he the one
thing that in his biography that makes
sense
is at least that little inclination
towards dramatics
he's not a very good actor but he knows
what roles
are playing best and because the
conservatives are such a
a self-contradictory and disorganized
and leaderless bunch it's enough to be
half good
on the proscenium uh to maintain it but
the worst thing about
and i should say this we have fractions
of
fractions in the west uh we have great
disenchantments we have
economic ruin facing some problems is
that after this covert thing
uh we have a generational tension set up
between
the oak and a lot of other people and he
is so much
on one side of all of these things and
it emerges from his government and his
ministers of smugness
about any opposition i i can't think of
a time when canada in a in a
kind of soft way uh was in such a
possibility of of of losing its own
confidence and the shoulders back as you
say
this country bit by bit by bit is
shedding uh
the sense of its own integrity and
drifting
and politics is is so shallow these days
i wish i wish i wish you could ever hear
you don't have there's no orator because
there's no truth
you can't build a great speech around
something you don't really believe in
and by the way here's i'll toss it back
to you we are a nation
when was the last time you heard a
national address
you know meant to underline and and as
you said though if there's no national
identity
what's to address yeah or if the
national identity is essentially
something like
tyrannical power and oppression and to
be fought at every possible
um what every possible corner by
every possible means what can you
possibly address
yeah and also the factionalism of
identity politics is
directly contradictory uh it
it seeks to to suffocate the idea of
commonality
and citizenship that's another that's a
huge worry
we're in in the in the name of
anti-racism
i see some of these tactics and some of
the demonizations and some of the
insults
as provoking the very cause that they
seem to be
against we got stuff fascinating on the
color of people's skin
which is what identity politics
sometimes just turns into
uh i have never seen a time when the our
country in 201
i wrote a column built this is not
systemically racist
i was in newfoundland when the americans
landed in 9 11. i interviewed some of
them no did it didn't have any problem
with
background color skin or anything else
the normal reflex of the normal canadian
welcome welcome welcome and yet we have
people like mr trudeau
catherine tayden cdc she accuses her own
organization of being systemically
racist
mr trudeau says the parliament does not
just happen to be like that it was
planned to be like
are we made of medieval you know
flatulence is is this the noob
it's a new patriotism that's why i
that's just my deepest problem with mr
trudeau
he's not as large as the nation that he
seeks or
seems to think he's governing
well i'm still struggling constantly to
understand
this to see to see because it does seem
to me to have accelerated in the last
few years whatever this
is that is accelerating i mean in
increasingly
the pathology that has decimated the
humanities in particular which is the
core of the university and you you know
it's self-punitive in some sense because
enrollment in the humanities is
plummeting right it's just
catastrophically declining and so you
might say well
if the motivation was resentment of the
creative process that produced the great
classics then
victory has been attained yeah classics
have been decimated and everyone
no one will attend to them anymore and
so you know
victory but it means the death of the
universities as far as i'm concerned and
then
but worse than that and and i could see
this happening five or six years ago
is that this is starting in a very major
way to percolate out into the broader
culture
so you see this in schools every
faculties of education in particular
should hang their heads
in utter shame what they've done to the
education system is beyond disgraceful
and it's barely got going
and you see this in the corporations too
i see these corporations they
they fall over themselves cow telling to
their hr departments
to bring in a philosophy that is um
explicitly anti-capitalist
yeah it's like what are you people doing
it's like
do you think you're going to be able to
pick and choose bits of this philosophy
once you open the door
no you i just can't believe that that
i can't believe
well we're we're on the same page there
uh it is
it is inexplicable uh from the schools
uh i've i've seen the material from some
of the schools none because it was
passed on to me
uh some of the training sessions the
idea that a human being with any
self-respect
would submit to anti-bias training who
the hell are you to tell me what
that i'm unconsciously biased i
the the the the weakness and cowardice
of the big corporations we don't even
know what those tests
measure i know people know there's
serious research on those
tests it's not obvious what that bias
consists of
it's the cultural revolution in china
and who's the ignorant fool that
has all this expertise does she or he
have cultural advice well
if it's unconscious how the healthy look
a nation of citizens wouldn't accept
this
you don't go into a shop as an employee
or a big firm or a law firm
and let some jerk in her human roar and
tell you take the sensitivity train
who the hell are you i went to church i
went to school that's what gives me my
personality
is that that's some corporate fool but
no everyone
shoulders down head under the desk
that's the biggest worry i i think we're
at the back end
of of some deliques and some some
some some melting of things that we knew
and we knew had they had maybe we're so
well off
we were being shielded from on this side
from the great wars and from poverty and
from
huge natural disasters our
ancestors built the place up for our
benefit and we waltz in and
we're full of life and vigor and we can
go places so
you you get you get lazy and complacent
and you let these these mice
of thought take over the building uh but
after a while as you said you can't
you can't taste a bit of this you have
to take it all
and i i mr judo should be fighting this
not underlining and endorsing it and so
what what
let's talk about the conservatives
momentarily i mean
they can't organize themselves they they
don't have a story that's compelling i
mean this isn't just a problem that's
distinct to canada the inability of
centrists to generate a romantically
compelling narrative
is universal across the west as far as i
can see
and so it i mean it
it i presume that trudeau will win the
next election i don't know what you
think
i think that uh barring some some
easter scale uh miracle
he will win mr o'toole the most recent
thing he did was to embrace
this this superstitional folly of
apocalyptic global warming and promised
his own carbon tax
all of his mps are from alberta and
saskatchewan
i i and there are there's one or two
people in the in the conservative party
of real talent
rhetorically there's no one matching uh
uh
uh significance is just something that
slipped away
uh pierre poliver but otherwise
no they're they consent to the things
do i should talk to pierre i think he's
very very good
uh again i i'm not suggested people
think that i
am partisan i am not i'd be just as hard
if it was
but polyvir uh i have i don't know
i have talked with him uh he's organized
yeah his seven minute speeches in
parliament
are very very good uh he agitates the
other
side greatly they hate him as opposed to
don't like him
uh he would have been a much more
convincing depressed despises him which
is another
medal of canada uh in his favor so yeah
he would be a very good he's articulate
as hell
i don't know much about him as such but
i watched the performance
and in the case of public life
performance is everything
so let's let's end this by we didn't
walk through your whole life but we
we walked into
um journalism
what was it like when you were younger
and what's happened and
and where do you see hope perhaps
i think it was a for most people that go
into it who actually
intended or intent with intent went
after a journalism career yeah fine i
knew a lot of the editors of really
small town newspapers there's about
eight or niners in newfoundland when i
was there
at harbor grace uh saint anthony's
clarenville
and they are the old hometown reporter
and these are small towns
uh they were fun uh they were that that
was their dirt of course
either eviscerated or folded up so long
st john's wasn't a particularly good
newspaper town but
at least they actually reported the news
they didn't go out and seek out causes
and
stick up things that whatever would
reflect this cause would be on the
newspaper
no it was the event it was the car crash
it was the election it was some foreign
it was something that actually happened
and we report things that happen
that are new uh we don't see ourselves
as a running channel
trying to bend the mind of our readers
jump
30 40 years uh in the states it's
absolutely toxic
nothing outside of soviet russia when it
was soviet russia
and prabha was the screen of all lies
journalism in the united states on all
the big networks
everyone goes on about fox have you ever
watched cnbc
have you ever watched cnn i mean you'd
need a mental cleanser
if you were in the same room they are
ruinously corrupt
they are ruinously incompetent some of
their anchors are
stupid i mean stupid in the sense that
they had to work hard to get as stupid
as they are
and then you have the newspapers who
decide well trump is such an evil that
we have to change the entire doctrine
of what a newspaper is we are out to get
him
when newspapers become activists it's
time to walk to the cemetery
and bury the the printing presses uh
so how much rex how much of that do you
think is is
merely a consequence merely a
consequence of technological revolution
i mean
there's so much journalism now it's
because anyone can pick up a pen and
have an
instant international audience if they
can attract it right you can blog you
can
do youtube videos it's like no one has a
monopoly on bandwidth anymore and no
so the newspapers and and and classical
journalists are really up against it in
in a profound way i mean are we just
seeing the consequences of
no you think it's more than that no no
no i i know it's bored that i i'm
being defined here now i know that
journalists
in the higher altitudes in national
journalists especially
they now see themselves as precurators
as
as persons as prestigious to some degree
at least
as those they report upon they also have
invested themselves with
a clerical view of things that they have
a wisdom that perhaps even the people
they're reporting on
are are incapable of receiving they are
there to teach you
uh cbc uh from my perspective
lost his audience mainly because he
became a preacher
and the the the the chief character
boring preacher
which is even more you you have hit so
many nails on the head with that
you do not need someone x if the cbc is
on these days
but no journalists have self-appointed
this is the problem
let's take the trans movement suddenly
they can in three days they can put
this particular issue which at best
exists at a micro level in terms of the
whole population and make that the new
the the new litmus test uh
you know for whether you're politically
correct or not
they endorse all ideological programs of
the hard left
and and i also i'll say this many
journals and journalists
don't like their own audiences or the
people who read them
uh don't like i said
about the humanities if you're thinking
about becoming a journalist
please look around a bit more before you
do although
those who do it very well as i said
glenn greenwald molly hemingway
melanie phillips i'm going around the
globe of these
these are sterling examples of what we
would hope well it seems that people
like that are increasingly
i would say going out there on their own
yeah they are they are melanie phillips
i do know
uh has their own thing set up greenwald
got tossed
because he wasn't subscribing to the
current philosophy but he had enough
standing that his intercept
i think it's the intercept uh is now and
he gets a lot of air time because again
he
he is i hate the term a celebrity
journalist but he's a good journalist
i disagree with 95 of what he thinks but
i i see him covering the press lately
uh the last five or six months of some
of his columns
they are as they say must read and barry
weiss's letter uh
that's also good stuff so there are good
people there but i think the weight
culturally with the universities the
corporations uh
the news media itself the trend towards
the
enforcement tacit or by mob
of a certain set of thoughts is so deep
and is so unresisted by so many that i i
think we're in for a long haul
and then if we have a bad economy coming
out of colvin and all the spending
it's going to be a terrible two or four
years there are so many people
and it's not being reported lost shops
lost jobs
lost hope saw some life enterprise
collapse and are you seeing this on the
news no you're not
anyway i don't mean i don't mean always
to end up
screaming at you
what makes you optimistic
any any flair of independence
i'm not as convinced that some of the
brilliant writing that is being done
in analysis and opposition is reaching
enough people
but i am encouraged that there's a lot
and i can't go through the whole span
there's a lot out there if you if you
search it out i don't know if this would
be classified as optimism
but when societies get really challenged
i mean really challenged
inevitably they revert to the genuine
virtues
if this current malays has set us back
really badly and if canada is
no longer a place that
has instant access to almost everything
it wants
maybe it's citizens of the world again
the
eternal values of intercommunication
of commonality of goals
and values not skin colors or ideologies
and that uh getting closer to reality if
we are forced to it by economics or
other things
we will dispense with we will be those
that all this is hollow and useless
but it's like you know you can afford to
play if you've got
everything else taken care of if you're
driven back to actually having to work
for things
think about things take time
and avoid falsity these these will blow
up
in the day whether that's going to
happen i kind of doubt it but
maybe that is the the the cynicism of
senescence creeping up on me
you've had a stellar career as a
journalist
you've had this sort of career that i
would say every journalist would like to
have
um you've been prolific and influential
and well-regarded and controversial and
and you've had a long life doing it and
done all sorts of interesting things
what advice would you have for someone
who wants to write
well what do they have to do if they
want to write
and it's particularly they want to be
journalists who write
go to the best examples one of
every journalism school in the country
should have the two volumes
of malcolm muggeridge's biography i do
this for two reasons
i know your veneration of charles
schnitzen and i also know you know
that malcolm uggrich was the very first
prominent western journalist
who wrote of the terror and the famine
uh he did it at the time in walter
durant he was lying
to the new york times and getting
pulitzer and nobel prizes for it
i would advise them to read flynn
o'brien
i would advise him to read charles i
would advise him most of all in terms of
reading read francis bacon's essays they
are the best lead story
the rest lines leading a story here's
one
what is truth suggesting pilot and would
not stay for an answer
if you want to know how to write a lead
sentence read any of bacon's
essays they have the most beautiful
thing
the other thing to write there's only
one thing
jordan if i may use your first name that
anyone who
seriously wants to write or wants to
write stuff that is serious as opposed
to
some victims diary
read read other people
read other novels there's nothing that
would
help you more in the art of writing than
reading and you could also add one more
thing if you read say the rate gatsby
you read the paragraph sit back or read
the poem
and ask yourself if i were to write this
if i had to communicate this thought how
would i have said it
then compared with what scott fitzgerald
did anyway i think i've
probably dragged you sir to the point of
perhaps
mortal tedium so i'm going to stop it
right there
thank you very much i really appreciate
you speaking with me
[Music]
you